SOURCE: https://www.santamonica.gov/media/Document%20Library/Detail/Rent%20Control%20Charter%20Amendment%20%26%20Regulations/00%2C%20CharterAmndmntComplete.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 18:02 UTC
PAGES: 1-18 of 337 (Article XVIII of the City Charter; the Rent Control Board regulations that follow are not included)

RENT CONTROL CHARTER AMENDMENT
Article XVIII is enacted as follows:

ARTICLE XVIII. RENT CONTROL
Section 1800. Statement of Purpose.
A growing shortage of housing units resulting in a low vacancy rate and rapidly rising rents exploiting this
shortage constitute a serious housing problem affecting the lives of a substantial portion of those Santa
Monica residents who reside in residential housing. In addition, speculation in the purchase and sale of
existing residential housing units results in further rent increases. These conditions endanger the public
health and welfare of Santa Monica tenants, especially the poor, minorities, students, young families, and
senior citizens. The purpose of this Article, therefore, is to alleviate the hardship caused by this serious
housing shortage by establishing a Rent Control Board empowered to regulate rentals in the City of Santa
Monica so that rents will not be increased unreasonably and so that landlords will receive no more than a
fair return.
In order to accomplish this purpose, this Article provides for an elected Rent Control Board to ensure that
rents are at a fair level by requiring landlords to justify any rents in excess of the rents in effect one year
prior to the adoption of this Article. Tenants may seek rent reductions from the rent in effect one year prior
to the adoption of this Article by establishing that those rents are excessive. In addition to giving tenants
an opportunity to contest any rent increase, this Article attempts to provide reasonable protection to tenants
by controlling removal of controlled rental units from the housing market and by requiring just cause for any
eviction from a controlled rental unit.
Through this Article, the city exercises its police power in order to address the serious housing problem
recognized in the original enactment of this Rent Control Law in 1979 and still existing in 2002. The 1984
and the 2002 Amendments to the Rent Control Law are intended to clarify the law and ensure that the Rent
Control Board possesses adequate and independent authority to carry out its duties. They are intended to
ensure due process of law for landlords and tenants, effective remedies for violation of the law, and
consistency with constitutional requirements. They are also intended to enable the Board to provide relief
to persons facing particular hardship and to protect and increase the supply of affordable housing in the
city. Termination or erosion of the protections of this Article would have serious disruptive consequences
for persons in need of protection and the supply of affordable housing in the city.
[Section 1800 Amended 11/5/02; Effective 12/20/02]

Section 1801. Definitions.
The following words or phrases as used in this Article shall have the following meanings:
(a)

BOARD: The term "Board" refers to the elected Rent Control Board established by this Article.

(b)

COMMISSIONERS:
Commissioners.

(c)

CONTROLLED RENTAL UNITS: All residential rental units in the City of Santa Monica,
including mobile homes, and mobile home spaces, and trailers and trailer spaces, except single
family homes to the extent provided for in section 1815 and those units found by the Board to
be exempt under one or more of the following provisions:

The members of the Board and Interim Board are denominated

1

Effective 12/6/22

(l)

Rental units in hotels, motels, inns, tourist homes and rooming and boarding houses
which are rented primarily to transient guests for a period of less than fourteen (14)
days.

(2)

Rental units in any hospital, convent, monastery, extended medical care facility,
asylum, non-profit home for the aged, or dormitory owned and operated by an
institution of higher education.

(3)

Rental units which a government unit, agency or authority owns, operates, manages,
or in which governmentally subsidized tenants reside only if applicable federal or state
law or administrative regulation specially exempt such units from municipal rent
control.

(4)

Rental units in owner-occupied dwellings with no more than three (3) units. For
purposes of this section:
(i)

The term "owner" means a natural person who owns a fifty (50) percent
ownership interest in the building and resides on the property as his or her
principal place of residence.

(ii)

An exemption under this section shall expire by operation of law when the
owner ceases to reside on the property as his or her principal place of
residence; thereafter, all units on the property shall be subject to all
provisions of this Article.

(5)

Rental units and dwellings constructed after the adoption of this Article; this exemption
does not apply to units created as a result of conversion as opposed to new
construction.

(6)

Where a unit is actually used for purposes of providing, on a non-profit basis, child care
or other residential social services in accordance with applicable laws. This exemption
shall expire when the use upon which exemption is based ceases. This exemption
shall only apply to units as they become vacant and shall only operate to allow the
specified use without the necessity of obtaining a removal permit under this Article.
This exemption shall not be construed to authorize the eviction of any tenant nor to
authorize the charging of rent in excess of that permitted under this Article. The Board
may adopt regulations to determine whether a unit qualifies for an exemption under
this section.

(7)

Exemptions are not automatic but shall be granted by the Board upon application by
the owner pursuant to Board rules, provided that if the Board does not act upon a
completed application for exemption within ninety (90) days of its filing it shall be
deemed approved.

(d)

HOUSING SERVICE: Housing services include, but are not limited to repairs, maintenance,
painting, providing light, hot and cold water, elevator service, window shades and screens, storage,
kitchen, bath and laundry facilities and privileges, janitor services, refuse removal, furnishings,
telephone, parking, the right to have a specified number of occupants, and any other benefit,
privilege or facility connected with the use or occupancy of any rental unit. Services to a rental unit
shall include a proportionate part of services provided to common facilities of the building in which
the rental unit is contained.

(e)

LANDLORD: An owner, lessor, sublessor or any other person entitled to receive rent for the use
and occupancy of any rental unit, or an agent, representative or successor of any of the foregoing.

2

Effective 12/6/22

(f)

RENT: All periodic payments and all nonmonetary consideration including but not limited to, the
fair market value of goods or services rendered to or for the benefit of the landlord under an
agreement concerning the use or occupancy of a rental unit and premises including all payment
and consideration demanded or paid for parking, pets, furniture, subletting and security deposits
for damages and cleaning.

(g)

RENTAL HOUSING AGREEMENT: An agreement, oral, written or implied, between a landlord
and tenant for use or occupancy of a rental unit and for housing services.

(h)

RENTAL UNITS: Any building, structure, or part thereof, or land appurtenant thereto, or any other
rental property rented or offered for rent for living or dwelling house units, together with all housing
services connected with use or occupancy of such property such as common areas and
recreational facilities held out for use by the tenant.

(i)

TENANT: A tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee or any other person entitled under the terms of
a rental housing agreement to the use or occupancy of any rental unit.

(j)

RECOGNIZED TENANT ORGANIZATION: Any group of tenants residing in controlled rental units
in the same building or in different buildings operated by the same management company, agent
or landlord, who requests to be so designated.

(k)

RENT CEILING: Rent ceiling refers to the limit on the maximum allowable rent which a landlord
may charge on any controlled rental unit.

(l)

BASE RENT CEILING: The maximum allowable rent established in Section 1804(b).

(m)

PROPERTY: All rental units on a parcel or lot or contiguous parcels or contiguous lots under
common ownership.

(n)

SINGLE FAMILY HOME: A property that has been developed with only one one-family dwelling
and any lawful accessory structures, or a lawfully created condominium, stock cooperative or
similar unit that is part of a larger residential structure or complex, excepting those condominiums,
stock cooperatives, or similar units converted after April 10, 1979 for which no removal permit or
vested right determination has been issued by the Board, and those created pursuant to Article XX
of this Charter.

[Section 1801(d) Amended 11/5/02; Effective 12/20/02]

Section 1802. Integrity and Autonomy of Board.
The Rent Control Board shall be an integral part of the government of the city, but shall exercise its powers
and duties under this Article independent of and without interference from the City Council, City Manager,
and City Attorney. With respect to the internal organization and affairs of the Board:
(a)

BUDGET. The Board shall, prior to July 1 of each year, hold a public hearing on a proposed budget
and adopt an annual budget for the ensuing fiscal year. At least thirty-five days prior to the
beginning of each fiscal year, the Board's Administrator shall submit to the Board the proposed
budget as prepared by him or her. After reviewing the same and making such revisions as it may
deem advisable, the Board shall determine the time for the holding of a public hearing thereon and
shall cause to be published a notice thereof not less than ten days prior to said hearing, by at least
one insertion in the official newspaper. Copies of the proposed budget shall be available for
inspection by the public in the office of the Board at least ten days prior to said hearing. The City
Council and the City Manager shall have no authority to oversee, supervise, or approve this budget.
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the ensuing fiscal year and the amounts stated
therein shall be and become appropriated by the Board for the respective objects and purposes
3

Effective 12/6/22

therein specified. At any meeting after the adoption of the budget the Board may amend or
supplement the budget by the affirmative votes of at least three members. Copies of the adopted
budget and any amendments or supplements shall be filed with the City Clerk, City Controller, and
City Manager. Necessary adjustments to city administrative procedures shall be made.
(b)

PERSONNEL. Except for the elected or appointed Commissioners, the Administrator, and
attorneys employed to represent or advise the Board, all employees of the Board are within the
classified civil service of the City. The Board shall appoint an administrator to administer and
supervise the exercise of its powers and duties who shall be directly responsible to the Board. All
employees of the Board, except the Administrator and attorneys, shall be hired, terminated,
suspended, and demoted in accordance with the provisions of Article XI of the Charter and
implementing provisions of the Municipal Code. The Board shall classify employee positions,
establish employee salaries and benefits, evaluate the performance of its employees, and be
responsible for the layoff and recall of its employees, pursuant to regulations and procedures that
it establishes. The Board may enter into and approve a Memorandum of Understanding with
representatives of its employees concerning their wages, benefits, hours of work, and terms and
conditions of employment in accordance with state law. The City Council shall have no power to
abolish positions established or classified by the Board under this Article, notwithstanding any other
section of this Charter. Provisions of the Municipal Code and other ordinances or resolutions of
the City Council shall not limit the Board's power to adopt regulations and policies and to approve
Memorandums of Understanding governing its relationship with its employees under this Section.

(c)

BOARD LEGAL WORK. Legal staff hired by the Board shall represent and advise the Board, its
Commissioners, and its staff in any civil matters, actions, or proceedings in which the Board, its
Commissioners, or its staff, in or by reason of their official capacity, are concerned or are a party.
The Board may, in its sole discretion, and without approval of the City Council, retain private
attorneys to furnish legal advice or representation in particular matters, actions or proceedings.

(d)

CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES. The Board shall comply with the provisions of the City Charter
providing for a centralized purchasing system and competitive bidding, and shall procure goods
and services as do other City agencies. Provided, however, that the Board shall have sole and
final authority to employ attorneys, legislative lobbyists, and other professionals, and to approve
contracts for such professional services.

(e)

CONFORMING REGULATIONS. If any portion of this Article is declared invalid or unenforceable
by decision of a court of competent jurisdiction or rendered invalid or unenforceable by state or
federal legislation, the Board and not the City Council shall have authority to enact replacement
regulations consistent with the intent and purpose of the invalidated provision and applicable law.
Such replacement regulations shall supersede invalidated or unenforceable provisions of this
Article to the extent necessary to resolve any inconsistency. The subject matter of such
replacement regulations shall be limited to rent control matters as enumerated in this Article.

Section 1803. Permanent Rent Control Board.
(a)

COMPOSITION: There shall be in the City of Santa Monica a Rent Control Board. The Board
shall consist of five elected Commissioners. The Board shall elect annually as chairperson, one of
its members to serve in that capacity.

(b)

ELIGIBILITY: Duly qualified electors of the City of Santa Monica are eligible to serve as
Commissioners of the Board.

(c)

FULL DISCLOSURE OF HOLDINGS: Candidates for the position of Commissioner shall submit a
verified statement listing all of their interests and dealings in real property, including but not limited
to its ownership, sale or management, during the previous three (3) years.

4

Effective 12/6/22

(d)

ELECTION OF COMMISSIONERS: Commissioners shall be elected at general municipal elections
in the same manner as set forth in Article XIV of the Santa Monica Charter, except that the first
Commissioners shall be elected at a special municipal election held within ninety (90) days of the
adoption of this Article. The elected Commissioners shall take office on the first Tuesday following
their election. If, upon the City Clerk’s determination of the qualified candidates, the number of
candidates does not exceed the number of vacant positions, no election will be held and the
qualified candidates shall be seated upon swearing in by the City Clerk.

(e)

TERM OF OFFICE: Commissioners shall be elected to serve terms of four years, beginning on
the first Tuesday following their election, except that of the first five Commissioners elected in
accordance with Section 1803(d), the two Commissioners receiving the most votes shall serve until
April 15, 1985 and the remaining three Commissioners shall serve until April 18, 1983.
Commissioners shall serve a maximum of two full terms.

(f)

POWERS AND DUTIES: The Board shall have the following powers and duties:

(g)

(l)

Set the rent ceilings for all controlled rental units.

(2)

Require registration of all controlled rental units under Section 1803(q).

(3)

Establish a base rent ceiling on rents under Section 1804(b).

(4)

To make adjustments in the rent ceiling in accordance with Section 1805.

(5)

Set rents at fair and equitable levels in order to achieve the intent of this Article.

(6)

Hire and pay necessary staff, including hearing examiners and personnel to issue
orders, rules and regulations, conduct hearings and charge fees as set forth below.

(7)

Make such studies, surveys and investigations, conduct such hearings, and obtain
such information as is necessary to carry out its powers and duties.

(8)

Report annually to the City Council of the City of Santa Monica on the status of
controlled rental housing.

(9)

Remove rent controls under Section 1803(r).

(10)

Issue permits for removal of controlled rental units from rental housing market under
Section 1803(t).

(11)

Administer oaths and affirmations and subpoena witnesses.

(12)

Establish rules and regulations for deducting penalties and settling civil claims under
Section 1809.

(13)

Refer violations of this Article to appropriate authorities for criminal prosecution.

(14)

Seek injunctive and other civil relief under Section 1811.

(15)

Charge and collect registration fees, including penalties for late payments.

RULES AND REGULATIONS: The Board shall issue and follow such rules and regulations,
including those which are contained in this Article, as will further the purposes of the Article. The
Board shall publicize its rules and regulations prior to promulgation in at least one newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Santa Monica. The Board shall hold at least one public hearing to
consider the views of interested parties before deciding whether to impose a dollar-amount ceiling

5

Effective 12/6/22

on a general adjustment under Section 1805(b) or deciding to decontrol or reimpose control for any
class of rental units under Section 1803(r). All rules and regulations, internal staff memoranda, and
written correspondence explaining the decisions, orders, and policies of the Board shall be kept in
the Board's office and shall be available to the public for inspection and copying. The Board shall
publicize this Article so that all residents of Santa Monica will have the opportunity to become
informed about their legal rights and duties under Rent Control in Santa Monica. The Board shall
prepare a brochure which fully describes the legal rights and duties of landlords and tenants under
Rent Control in Santa Monica. The brochure will be available to the public, and each tenant of a
controlled rental unit shall receive a copy of the brochure from his or her landlord.
(h)

MEETINGS: The Board shall hold such regularly scheduled meetings as are necessary to ensure
the timely performance of its duties under this Article. All regular and special meetings shall be
called and conducted in accordance with state law.

(i)

QUORUM: Three Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the Board.

(j)

VOTING: The affirmative vote of three Commissioners of the Board is required for a decision,
including all motions, regulations, and orders of the Board.

(k)

COMPENSATION: Each Commissioner shall receive for every meeting attended seventy-five
dollars ($75.00), but in no event shall any Commissioner receive in any twelve month period more
than forty-seven hundred and fifty dollars ($4,750) for services rendered.

(l)

DOCKETS: The Board shall maintain and keep in its office all hearing dockets.

(m)

VACANCIES: If a vacancy shall occur on the Board, the Board shall within thirty (30) days appoint
a qualified person to fill such a vacancy until the following municipal election when a qualified
person shall be elected to serve for the remainder of the term.

(n)

FINANCING: The Board shall finance its reasonable and necessary expenses by charging
landlords annual registration fees in amounts deemed reasonable by the Board up to a maximum
annual registration fee of $288 per controlled unit. Fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the
registration fees may be passed through from landlords to tenants, and the Board may establish
applicable conditions and procedures governing the pass through. The Board is also empowered
to request and receive funding when and if necessary from any available source for its reasonable
and necessary expenses.

(o)

RECALL: Commissioners may be recalled in accordance with the provisions of Article XIV of the
Santa Monica Charter.

(p)

STAFF: The Board shall employ and pay such staff, including hearing examiners and inspectors,
as may be necessary to perform its function efficiently in order to fulfill the purpose of this Article.

(q)

REGISTRATION: Within sixty (60) days after the adoption of this Article, the Board shall require
the registration of all controlled rental units, which shall be re-registered at times deemed
appropriate by the Board. The initial registration shall include the rent in effect at the time on the
date of the adoption of this Article, base rent ceiling, the address of the rental unit, the name and
address of the landlord, the housing services provided to the unit, a statement indicating all
operating cost increases since the base rent ceiling date, and any other information deemed
relevant by the Board. The Board shall require the landlord to report vacancies in the controlled
rental units and shall make a list of vacant controlled rental units available to the public. If the
Board, after the landlord has proper notice and after a hearing, determines that a landlord has
willfully and knowingly failed to register a controlled rental unit, the Board may authorize the tenant
of such a non-registered controlled rental unit to withhold all or a portion of the rent for the unit until
such time as the rental unit is properly registered. After a rental unit is properly registered, the
Board shall determine what portion, if any, of the withheld rent is owed to the landlord for the period

6

Effective 12/6/22

in which the rental unit was not properly registered. Whether or not the Board allows such
withholding, no landlord who has failed to register properly shall at any time increase rents for a
controlled rental unit until such units are properly registered.
(r)

DECONTROL: If the average annual vacancy rate in any category, classification, or area of
controlled rental units exceeds five (5) percent, the Board is empowered, at its discretion and in
order to achieve the objectives of this Article, to remove rent controls from such category,
classification or area. The Board may determine such categories, classifications, or areas for
purposes of decontrol consistent with the objectives of this Article. In determining the vacancy rate
for any category, classification or area of controlled rental units, the Board shall consider all
available data and shall conduct its own survey. If units are decontrolled pursuant to this
subsection, controls shall be reimposed if the Board finds that the average annual vacancy rate
has thereafter fallen below five (5) percent for such category, classification or area.

(s)

SECURITY DEPOSITS: Any payment or deposit of money the primary function of which is to
secure the performance of a rental agreement or any part of such agreement, including an advance
payment of rent, shall be placed in an interest bearing account at a federally insured financial
institution until such time as it is returned to the tenant or entitled to be used by the landlord. Unless
and until the Board enacts regulations directing that the interest on such accounts be paid directly
to the tenant, the landlord may either pay such interest directly to the tenant or use it to offset
operating expenses, in which case the offset shall be a factor in making individual rent adjustments
under Section 1805. The Board may regulate the amount and use of security deposits consistent
with the purposes of this Article and state law.

(t)

REMOVAL OF CONTROLLED UNIT FROM RENTAL HOUSING MARKET:
(1)

Any landlord who desires to remove a controlled rental unit from the rental housing market
by demolition, conversion or other means is required to obtain a permit from the Board
prior to such removal from the rental housing market in accordance with rules and
regulations promulgated by the Board. In order to approve such a permit, the Board is
required to find that the landlord cannot make a fair return by retaining the controlled rental
unit.

(2)

Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, the Board may approve such
a permit:
(i)

If the Board finds that the controlled rental unit is uninhabitable and is
incapable of being made habitable in an economically feasible manner, or

(ii)

If the permit is being sought so that the property may be developed with
multifamily dwelling units and the permit applicant agrees as a condition
of approval, that the units will not be exempt from the provisions of this
Article pursuant to Section 1801(c) and that at least fifteen (15) percent of
the controlled rental units to be built on the site will be at rents affordable
by persons of low income.

(3)

The Housing Element of the General Plan of the City of Santa Monica shall at all times
contain a provision that neither the City Council nor any City agency shall approve an
application for tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map for a converted unit
until and unless the applicant first obtains a removal permit as required by this Section.
This subsection shall not apply to any tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map
approved in accordance with Article XX relating to tenant ownership rights.

(4)

The Board shall render its final decision within one hundred and twenty (120) days of
the filing of a completed application under this section.

7

Effective 12/6/22

[Section 1803(g) Amended 11/6/12; Effective 12/12/12]
[Section 1803(n) Amended 11/4/14; Effective 11/29/14]
[Section 1803(d) Amended 11/8/22; Effective 12/6/22]

Section 1804. Maximum Allowable Rents
(a)

TEMPORARY FREEZE:
(1)

Rents shall not be increased during the one hundred-twenty (120) day period following the
date of adoption of this Article.

(2)

Notwithstanding Section 1805, the Board may, in its discretion and in order to protect the
public’s health and safety, disallow or, alternatively, modify otherwise-allowed annual
general adjustments to rent ceilings during a state of emergency declared by the President
of the United States, the Governor, or the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health
Officer, or upon the declaration of a local emergency by the City Council or Director of
Emergency Services. Nothing in this section precludes a landlord from filing a petition for
an upward rent adjustment per Section 1805 of the City Charter.

(b)

ESTABLISHMENT OF BASE RENT CEILING: Beginning one-hundred-twenty (120) days after the
adoption of this Article, no landlord shall charge rent for any controlled rental units in an amount
greater than the rent in effect on the date one year prior to the adoption of this Article. The rent in
effect on that date is the base rent ceiling. If there was no rent in effect on the date one year prior
to the adoption of this Article, the base rent ceiling shall be the rent that was charged on the first
date that rent was charged following the date one year prior to the adoption of this Article. For
tenancies commencing on or after January 1, 1999, which qualify for a vacancy rent increase
pursuant to state law, the base rent ceiling is the initial rental rate in effect on the date the tenancy
commences. As used in this subsection, the term “initial rental rate” means only the amount of rent
actually paid by the tenant for the initial term of the tenancy. The base rent ceiling is the reference
point from which the rent ceiling shall be adjusted upward or downward in accordance with Section
1805.

(c)

POSTING: As soon as the landlord is aware of the maximum allowable rent, the landlord shall post
it for each unit in a prominent place in or about the affected controlled rental units. The Board may
require that other information it deems relevant also be posted.

[Section 1804(b) Amended 11/5/02; Effective 12/20/02]
[Section 1804(b) Amended 11/6/12; Effective 12/12/12]
[Section 1804(a)(1) Amended and Section 1804(a)(2) Adopted 11/8/22; Effective 12/6/22]

Section 1805. Individual and General Adjustment of Ceilings on Allowable Rents
(a)

ANNUAL GENERAL ADJUSTMENT: No later than June 30 each year, the Board shall announce
the percentage by which rent ceilings for eligible units will be generally adjusted effective
September 1 of that year.
(1)

The adjustment shall be equal to seventy five percent of the percentage increase in the
Consumer Price Index (All Urban Consumers, Los Angeles, Riverside, Orange County
region, or any successor designation of that index that may later be adopted by the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics) as reported and published by the U.S. Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics, for the 12-month period ending as of March of the current year.

8

Effective 12/6/22

(b)

(2)

In determining the allowable percentage increase, numbers of .04 and below shall be
rounded down to the nearest tenth decimal place and numbers of .05 and above shall be
rounded up to the nearest tenth decimal place.

(3)

Subparagraph 1 of this subsection notwithstanding, in no event shall the general
adjustment be less than zero percent or greater than three (3) percent; and

(4)

Commencing February 1, 2023, the general adjustment during the period from February 1,
2023, through August 31, 2023, shall be 0.8% of the maximum allowable rent (MAR) in
effect as of August 31, 2022, with a maximum dollar amount limit of nineteen dollars ($19)
(“Adjusted GA”). Absent an individual adjustment pursuant to subparagraphs (c) through
(h) of this Section, the MAR during this seven month transition period shall be the MAR in
effect as of August 31, 2022, plus the Adjusted GA. Notwithstanding the Board’s June
2022 announcement of the 2022 general adjustment, the MAR for any period after August
31, 2023, shall be calculated pursuant to this Section 1805 as if the General Adjustment
for the entire period from September 1, 2022, through August 31, 2023, had been three (3)
percent, with a maximum dollar amount limit of seventy dollars ($70). The Rent Control
Board may by regulation increase the Adjusted GA for landlords who did not increase their
rents by the full six (6) percent prior to February 1, 2023, so long as the average rent
increase for the period from September 1, 2022, through August 31, 2023, does not exceed
the lower of 3% or $70 per month.

(5)

If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Section is for any reason held to be invalid, unlawful, or unconstitutional, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Section or any portion thereof.

DOLLAR AMOUNT CEILING
The Board may, in its discretion, impose a dollar-amount limit to any annual general adjustment.
The dollar-amount limit shall be calculated using the following methodology:
(1)

The Board shall determine the eighty fifth percentile of the maximum allowable rent of all
controlled units;

(2)

The Board shall then determine the eighty fifth percentile of maximum allowable rent of all
controlled units with a base rent established before January 1, 1999;

(3)

The dollar-amount limit shall be the average of the two rents arrived at under paragraphs
(1) and (2) multiplied by the annual general adjustment determined under paragraph (a) of
this Section.

(c)

PETITIONS: Upon receipt of a petition by a landlord and/or a tenant, the maximum rent of individual
controlled rental units may be adjusted upward or downward in accordance with the procedures
set forth elsewhere in this Section. The petition shall be on the form provided by the Board and
shall include a declaration by the landlord that the unit meets all requirements of Section 1805(h).
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the Board or hearing examiner may refuse to
hold a hearing and/or grant a rent adjustment if an individual hearing has been held and decision
made with regard to maximum rent within the previous six months.

(d)

HEARING PROCEDURE: The Board shall enact rules and regulations governing hearings and
appeals of individual adjustment of ceilings on allowable rents which shall include the following:
(1)

HEARING EXAMINER: A hearing examiner appointed by the Board shall conduct a
hearing to act upon the petition for individual adjustment of ceilings on allowable rents
and shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations.

9

Effective 12/6/22

(2)

NOTICE: The Board shall notify the landlord if the petition was filed by the tenant, or
the tenant, if the petition was filed by the landlord, of the receipt of such a petition and
a copy thereof.

(3)

TIME OF HEARING: The hearing officer shall notify all parties, as to the time, date
and place of the hearing.

(4)

RECORDS: The hearing examiner may require either party to a rent adjustment
hearing to provide it with any books, records and papers deemed pertinent in addition
to that information contained in registration statements. The hearing examiner shall
conduct a current building inspection and/or request the city to conduct a current
building inspection if the hearing examiner finds good cause to believe the Board's
current information does not reflect the current condition of the controlled rental unit.
The tenant may request the hearing examiner to order such an inspection prior to the
date of the hearing. All documents required under this Section shall be made available
to the parties involved prior to the hearing at the office of the Board. In cases where
information filed in a petition for rent ceiling adjustment or in additional submissions
filed at the request of the hearing examiner is inadequate or false, no action shall be
taken on said petition until the deficiency is remedied.

(5)

OPEN HEARINGS: All rent ceiling adjustment hearings shall be open to the public.

(6)

RIGHT OF ASSISTANCE: All parties to a hearing may have assistance in presenting
evidence and developing their position from attorneys, legal workers, recognized
tenant organization representatives or any other persons designated by said parties.

(7)

HEARING RECORD: The Board shall make available for inspection and copying by
any person an official record which shall constitute the exclusive record for decision on
the issues at the hearing. The record of the hearing, or any part of one, shall be
obtainable for the cost of copying. The record of the hearing shall include: all exhibits,
papers and documents required to be filed or accepted into evidence during the
proceedings; a list of participants present; a summary of all testimony accepted in the
proceedings; a statement of all materials officially noticed; all recommended decisions;
orders and/or rulings; all final decisions, orders and/or rulings, and the reasons for each
final decision, order and/or ruling. Any party may have the proceeding tape recorded
or otherwise transcribed at his or her own expense.

(8)

QUANTUM OF PROOF AND NOTICE OF DECISION: No individual adjustment shall
be granted unless supported by the preponderance of the evidence submitted at the
hearing. All parties to a hearing shall be sent a notice of the decision and a copy of
the findings of fact and law upon which said decision is based. At the same time,
parties to the proceeding shall also be notified of their right to any appeal allowed by
the Board and/or to judicial review of the decision pursuant to this Section and Section
1808 of this Article.

(9)

CONSOLIDATION: All landlord petitions pertaining to tenants in the same building will
be consolidated for hearing, and all petitions filed by tenants occupying the same
building shall be consolidated for hearing unless there is a showing of good cause
not to consolidate such petitions.

(10)

APPEAL: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner may appeal
to the Board. On appeal, the Board shall affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the
hearing examiner. The Board may conduct a de novo hearing or may act on the basis
of the record before the hearing examiner without holding a hearing.

10

Effective 12/6/22

(11)

FINALTY OF DECISION: The decision of the hearing examiner shall be the final
decision of the Board in the event of no appeal to the Board. The decision of the
hearing examiner shall not be stayed pending appeal; however, in the event that the
Board on appeal reverses or modifies the decision of the hearing examiner, the
landlord, in the case of an upward adjustment in rent, or the tenant, in the case of a
downward adjustment of rent, shall be ordered to make retroactive payments to restore
the parties to the position they would have occupied had the hearing examiner's
decision been the same as that of the Board.

(12)

TIME FOR DECISION: The rules and regulations adopted by the Board shall provide
for final action on any individual rent adjustment petition within one-hundred and twenty
(120) days, following the date of filing of the individual rent adjustment petition.

(13)

BOARD ACTION IN LIEU OF REFERENCE TO HEARING EXAMINER: The Board,
on its own motion or on the request of any landlord or tenant, may hold a hearing on
an individual petition for rent adjustment without the petition first being heard by a
hearing examiner.

(14)

Decisions decreasing rents shall remain in effect until the Board finds that the landlord
has corrected the defect warranting the decrease. The Board shall, by regulation,
establish procedures for making prompt compliance determinations. Upon a
determination of compliance the landlord shall be entitled to reinstatement of the prior
rent level, retroactive to the date that the landlord corrected the defect which warranted
the decrease.

(e)

In making individual adjustments of the rent ceiling, the Board shall consider the purposes of this
Article and the requirements of law. In making an individual downward adjustment, the Board may
consider decreases in living space, furniture, furnishings, equipment, or services; substantial
deterioration of the controlled rental unit other than as a result of ordinary wear and tear; or failure
on the part of the landlord to provide adequate housing services or to comply substantially with
applicable housing, health and safety codes. In making an individual upward adjustment, The
Board may employ as its fair return standard any lawful formula, including but not limited to one
based on investment or net operating income. The Board shall consider all factors relevant to the
formula it employs. Such factors may include: increases or decreases in operating and
maintenance expenses; the extent of utilities paid by the landlord; necessary and reasonable
capital improvement of the controlled rental unit as distinguished from normal repair, replacement
and maintenance; increases or decreases in living space, furniture, furnishings, equipment, or
services; federal and state income tax benefits; the speculative nature of the investment; whether
or not the property was acquired or is held as a long term or short term investment; the landlord's
rate of return on investment; the landlord's current and base date Net Operating Income; and any
other factor deemed relevant by the Board in providing the landlord a fair return.

(f)

No rent increase shall be authorized by this Article because a landlord has a negative cash flow as
the result of refinancing the controlled rental unit if at the time the landlord refinanced the landlord
could reasonably have foreseen a negative cash flow based on the rent schedule then in existence
within the one year period following refinancing. This paragraph shall only apply to that portion of
the negative cash flow reasonably foreseeable within the one year period following refinancing of
the controlled rental unit and shall only apply to controlled rental units refinanced after the date of
adoption of this Article.

(g)

No rent increase shall be authorized by this Article because a landlord has a negative cash flow if
at the time the landlord acquired the controlled rental unit, the landlord could reasonably have
foreseen a negative cash flow based on the rent schedule then in existence within the one year
period following acquisition. This paragraph shall only apply to that portion of the negative cash
flow reasonably foreseeable within the one year period following acquisition of a controlled rental
unit and shall only apply to controlled rental units acquired after the date of adoption of this Article.

11

Effective 12/6/22

(h)

(i)

No landlord shall increase rent under this Article if the landlord:
(1)

Has failed to comply with any provisions of this Article and/or regulations issued
thereunder by the Board, including the provisions requiring the payment of registration
fees and registration penalties.

(2)

Has failed to comply substantially with any applicable state or local housing, health or
safety law. No landlord shall increase rent unless the notice increasing rent contains
a statement in substantially the following form: "The undersigned (landlord) certifies
that this unit and common areas are not subject to any uncorrected citation or notices
of violation of any state or local housing health, or safety laws issued by any
government official or agency." If a landlord fails to comply with this subsection, the
tenant may refuse to pay the improperly noticed increase, may seek administrative or
civil remedies under this Article, and may raise the landlord's noncompliance as an
affirmative defense in any resulting unlawful detainer action.

The Board may, in its discretion, enact regulations to provide for increases of rents on units
voluntarily vacated after the effective date of this subsection in properties where the landlord has
dedicated a percentage of units to be rented to persons of very low or low income at affordable
rents. The Board may enact procedures and other regulations governing determination of the
conditions upon which such increases will be permitted, the extent of the increases, the required
mix of affordable units to be provided, ways to ensure the continued provision of affordable housing
under this subsection, the terms and conditions applicable when landlords cease to participate or
when tenants vacate or cease to qualify for units dedicated to affordable housing, and other
measures it deems necessary.
If the Board enacts regulations under this subsection, it shall provide for the following:
(1)

That a property shall not be eligible for this program unless a specified percentage of
all units on the property, no less than fifteen (15) percent, will be occupied by tenants
of very low or low income and the rent on each unit so occupied does not exceed a
specified percentage, no greater than thirty (30) percent, of such tenants' income.

(2)

That tenants of very low or low income occupying units maintained at affordable rent
levels under this program are protected if the landlord elects not to participate further
in the program. Such protection shall include, at a minimum, a provision prohibiting
the rent of such tenants from being increased by a percentage greater than the general
annual adjustment allowed by the Board even if the resulting rent is below the
maximum allowable rent and the landlord has lowered the rent for other units on the
property.

[Section 1805(a), (b), (e) Amended 11/6/12; Effective 12/12/12]
[Section 1805(a)(3) Amended and Section 1805(a)(4) and (5) Adopted 11/8/22; Effective 12/6/22]

Section 1806. Eviction
(a)

No landlord shall take action to terminate any tenancy including but not limited, to making a demand
for possession of a rental unit, threatening to terminate a tenancy, serving any notice to quit or
other eviction notice or bringing any action to recover possession or be granted recovery of
possession of a controlled rental unit unless:
(1)

The tenant has failed to pay the rent to which the landlord is entitled under the rental
housing agreement and this Article.

12

Effective 12/6/22

(2)

The tenant has continued, after written notice to cease, to commit a material and
substantial breach of an obligation or covenant of his or her tenancy which the landlord has
not waived either expressly or impliedly through the landlord’s conduct and which the
landlord is not estopped from asserting, other than the obligation to surrender possession
upon proper notice. Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this Section, and
notwithstanding any contrary provision in the rental housing agreement, a landlord shall
not take any action to terminate a tenancy based on a tenant’s sublease of the unit if the
following requirements are met:
(i)

The tenant continues to reside in the rental unit.

(ii)

The sublease replaces a departed tenant(s) under the rental agreement on a onefor-one basis.

(iii)

The landlord has unreasonably withheld the right to sublease following written
request by the tenant. If the landlord fails to respond to the tenant in writing within
fourteen (14) days of receipt of the tenant’s written request, the tenant’s request
shall be deemed approved by the landlord.

(3)

The tenant has continued, after written notice to cease, to commit or expressly permit a
nuisance in, or cause substantial damage to, the controlled rental unit, or to create a
substantial interference with the comfort, safety, or enjoyment of the landlord or other
occupants or neighbors of the same.

(4)

The tenant is convicted of using or expressly permitting a controlled rental unit to be used
for any illegal purpose.

(5)

The tenant, who had a rental housing agreement which had terminated, has refused, after
written request or demand by the landlord, to execute a written extension or renewal
thereof for a further term of like duration and in such terms as are not inconsistent with or
violative of any provisions of this Article and are materially the same as in the previous
agreement.

(6)

The tenant has continued to refuse, after written notice, to grant the landlord reasonable
access to the controlled rental unit for the purposes of making necessary repairs or
improvements required by the laws of the United States, the State of California or any
subdivision thereof, or for the purpose of showing the rental housing to any prospective
purchaser or mortgagee.

(7)

The tenant holding at the end of the term of the rental housing agreement is a subtenant
not approved by the landlord.

(8)

The landlord seeks to recover possession in good faith for use and occupancy by herself
or himself, or her or his children, parents, grandparents, brother, sister, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, son-in-law, or daughter-in-law.
(i)

A "landlord" shall be defined as a natural person who has at least a fifty (50)
percent ownership interest in the property.

(ii)

No eviction may take place if any landlord or enumerated relative already occupies
one unit on the property, or if a vacancy already exists on the property and the
vacant unit is comparable to the unit for which eviction is sought. Where the vacant
unit is determined not to be comparable, thereby permitting eviction under this
subsection, the evicted tenant or tenants shall be first given the right to occupy the
vacant unit and the rent thereof shall be the lesser of the maximum allowable rent
for the vacant unit and the maximum allowable rent of the unit from which the

13

Effective 12/6/22

tenant or tenants are evicted. The Rent Control Board shall promulgate
regulations defining when a unit is comparable for purposes of this paragraph.
(iii)

The notice terminating tenancy shall contain the name, address and relationship
to the landlord of the person intended to occupy.

(iv)

The landlord or enumerated relative must intend in good faith to move into the unit
within sixty (60) days after the tenant vacates and to occupy the unit as a primary
residence for at least two years, unless extenuating circumstances exist. The
Board may adopt regulations governing the determination of good faith.

(v)

If the landlord or relative specified on the notice terminating tenancy fails to occupy
the unit within sixty (60) days after the tenant vacates or fails to occupy the unit as
a primary residence for at least two years, unless extenuating circumstances exist,
the landlord shall:
A.

Offer the unit to the tenant who vacated it.

B.

Pay to said tenant all reasonable expenses incurred in moving to
and/or from the unit.

(vi)

No eviction pursuant to this subsection shall be allowed in any condominium or
stock cooperative unit which has been converted from an apartment or other rental
unit after April 10, 1979, unless the Rent Control Board has issued a removal
permit or declared a vested right for said unit. As used in this subpart, a unit shall
be deemed converted after April 10, 1979, if on April 10, 1979, the recorded tract
map or parcel map for the property showed the unit as included in the property.

(vii)

A landlord may not evict a tenant pursuant to this Subsection if the tenant (A) has
resided in the unit for at least five years and is either at least 62 years old or
disabled; or (B) is certified as being terminally ill by the tenant’s treating physician.
For the purposes of this Subsection, “disabled” means a person who is receiving
benefits from a federal, state, or local government, or from a private entity, on
account of a permanent disability that prevents the person from engaging in
regular, full-time employment.
Notwithstanding the above, a landlord may evict a tenant who qualifies for the
exemption if the landlord or enumerated relative who will occupy the unit also
meets the criteria for this exemption.

(9)

The landlord seeks to recover possession to demolish or otherwise remove the controlled
rental unit from rental residential housing use after having obtained all proper permits from
the City of Santa Monica.

(10)

The landlord has filed the requisite documents with the Rent Control Board initiating the
procedure for withdrawing units from rent or lease under Government Code Section 7060
et. seq. and the Board’s regulations, with the intention of completing the withdrawal process
and going out of the residential rental business.

(b)

Any written notice as described in Subsections (a)(2), (3) or (6) shall be served by the landlord a
reasonable period prior to serving a notice to terminate tenancy and shall inform the tenant that a
failure to cure may result in the initiation of eviction proceedings. The Board may enact regulations
regarding reasonable notice.

(c)

Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this Section or in the rental housing agreement, if the
tenant’s spouse, child(ren), and/or domestic partner who has filed an Affidavit of Domestic

14

Effective 12/6/22

Partnership with the City have lived in the unit for at least one year at the time the tenant vacates
the unit due to death or incapacitation, the landlord is prohibited from taking any action to obtain
possession of the unit from the tenant’s spouse, child(ren), and/or registered domestic partner on
the ground that the spouse, child(ren) and/or registered domestic partner are not authorized to
occupy the unit.
(d)

Notwithstanding the above provisions, possession shall not be granted if it is determined that the
eviction is in retaliation for the tenant reporting violations of this Article, for exercising rights
granted under this Article, including the right to withhold rent upon authorization of the Board
under Section 1803(q) or Section 1809 or for organization other tenants.

(e)

In any notice purporting to terminate tenancy the landlord shall state the cause for the
termination, and in any action brought to recover possession of a controlled rental unit, the
landlord shall allege and prove compliance with this Section. The landlord shall file with the Rent
Control Board a copy of any notice terminating tenancy, except a three day notice to pay rent or
vacate, within 3 days after serving the notice on the tenant.

(f)

Failure to comply with any requirement of this Section may be asserted as an affirmative defense
in an action brought by the landlord to recover possession of the unit. Additionally, any attempt to
recover possession of a unit in violation of this Article shall render the landlord liable to the tenant
for actual and punitive damages, including damages for emotional distress, in a civil action for
wrongful eviction. The tenant or the Rent Control Board may seek injunctive relief and money
damages for wrongful eviction. The prevailing party in an action for wrongful eviction shall
recover costs and reasonable attorneys fees.

[Section 1806(b) Amended April 24/25, 1999; Effective 6/15/99]
[Section 1806 Amended 11/5/02; Effective 12/20/02]
[Section 1806(a)(2),(3),(6),(8)(vii) and (b) Amended 11/2/10; Effective 12/17/10]
[Section 1806(a)(8)(iv) and (v) Amended 11/8/22; Effective 12/6/22]

Section 1807. Non-waiverability
Any provision, whether oral or written in or pertaining to a rental housing agreement whereby any provision
of this Article for the benefit of the tenant is waived, shall be deemed to be against public policy and shall
be void.
Section 1808. Judicial Review
A landlord or tenant aggrieved by any action or decision of the Board may seek judicial review by appealing
to the appropriate court within the jurisdiction.
Section 1809. Civil Remedies
(a)

Any landlord who demands, accepts, receives, or retains any payment of rent in excess of the
maximum lawful rent, in violation of the provisions of this Article or any rule, regulation or order
hereunder promulgated, including the provisions ensuring compliance with habitability standards
and registration fee requirements, shall be liable in a civil action to the tenant from whom such
payments are demanded, accepted, received or retained, for reasonable attorney's fees and costs
as determined by the court, plus damages in the amount by which the payment or payments
demanded, accepted, received or retained exceeds the maximum lawful rent. A civil penalty of
treble the amount by which the payment or payments demanded, accepted, received or retained
exceeds the maximum lawful rent shall be awarded against the landlord upon a showing that the

15

Effective 12/6/22

landlord has acted willfully or with oppression, fraud or malice. No administrative remedy need be
exhausted prior to filing suit pursuant to this subsection.
(b)

In lieu of filing a civil action, a tenant may file an administrative complaint. The Board shall establish
by rule and regulation a hearing procedure similar to that set forth in Section 1805(d).
(1)

The rules and regulations adopted by the Board shall provide for final Board action on any
complaint for excess rent within one-hundred and twenty (120) days following the date of
filing of the complaint.

(2)

In any administrative hearing under this Section, a landlord who demands, accepts,
receives or retains any payment of rent in excess of the maximum lawful rent shall be liable
for damages in the amount by which the payment or payments demanded, accepted,
received or retained exceeds the maximum lawful rent and may be liable for an additional
amount not to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500), for costs, expenses incurred in
pursuing the hearing remedy, damages and penalties. The tenant shall bear the burden
of proving entitlement to the penalty. The tenant may deduct the penalty and award of
damages from future rent payments in the manner provided by the Board. An order
authorizing rent withholding under this Article shall survive the sale or other transfer of the
property and shall be binding upon successors of the landlord against whom the order was
made. If a tenant authorized to withhold rent under this Article vacates the property, the
landlord shall pay to such tenant a sum equal to the balance of the rent that the tenant
could have withheld.

(c)

If the tenant from whom such excessive payment is demanded, accepted, received or retained in
violation of the foregoing provisions of this Article or any rule or regulation or order hereunder
promulgated fails to bring a civil or administrative action as provided for in Section 1809(a) and
1809(b) within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date of occurrence of the violation, the
Board may settle the claim arising out of the violation or bring such action. Thereafter, the tenant
on whose behalf the Board acted is barred from also bringing an action against the landlord in
regard to the same violation for which the Board has made a settlement or brought action. In the
event the Board settles said claim, it shall be entitled to retain the costs it incurred in settlement
thereof, and the tenant against whom the violation has been committed shall be entitled to the
remainder.

(d)

The appropriate court in the jurisdiction in which the controlled rental unit affected is located shall
have jurisdiction over all actions brought under this Section.

Section 1810. Criminal Remedies:
Any landlord violating this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any landlord convicted of a
misdemeanor under the provisions of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500), or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
Section 1811. Injunctive and Other Civil Relief.
The Board, and tenants and landlords of controlled units, may seek relief from the appropriate court within
the jurisdiction within which the affected controlled rental unit is located to enforce any provision of this
Article or its implementing regulations or to restrain or enjoin any violation of this Article and of the rules,
regulations, orders and decisions of the Board.

16

Effective 12/6/22

Section 1812. Partial Invalidity:
If any provision of this Article or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, this
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Article which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Article are declared to be severable.
This Article shall be liberally construed to achieve the purposes of this Article and to preserve its validity.
Section 1813. Relationship to Article XX.
Section 1803(t) of this Article shall not apply to any building for which approval has been received pursuant
to Article XX (Tenant Ownership Rights Charter Amendment) of this Charter. All other provisions of this
Article, however, shall continue to apply with full force and effect to each unit in any building receiving
approval pursuant to Article XX. Tenants residing in such units, whether or not "qualifying," "participating,"
or any other such designation under Article XX, shall enjoy all the rights and remedies provided by this
Article without limitation as to duration or to ownership of the unit. This Section is declarative of existing
law and does not impose any new requirements or limit any existing ones.
Section 1814. Existing Board Practices.
To the extent that the amendments to Article XVIII adopted at the same time as this Section incorporate
rules, regulations and practices of the Rent Control Board existing on the date of the adoption hereof, this
amendment is declarative of existing law and does not impose any new requirements or limit any existing
ones.
Section 1815. Single Family Homes.
Single Family homes that were not used for residential rental purposes on July 1, 1984 are automatically
exempt from the provisions of this Article. Single family homes that are not exempt under the preceding
sentence are subject to all requirements of this Article, but shall be permanently exempted by the Board
upon proof that the home has been continuously occupied by the owner for a period of two years as a
principal place of residence after voluntary vacancy by the tenant or lawful eviction of the tenant. An owner
may have only one exemption under this Section at any one time.
Section 1820. State Owned Property.
This Article shall not apply to any property which is part of the State Park System or sovereign tidelands
and owned by the State of California on July 1, 1990.
[Section 1820 Adopted 11/6/90; Effective 12/10/90]

Section 1821. Tenant Harassment.
Tenants living in rental housing units have the right to quiet enjoyment, privacy and freedom from
harassment by the property owner. In order to effectuate this right, the City Council shall at all times
maintain a Tenant Harassment Ordinance in force which protects tenants from landlords’ conduct in
derogation of tenants’ rights.
[Section 1821 Adopted 11/5/02; Effective 12/20/02]

17

Effective 12/6/22

__________
[Article XVIII Adopted 4/10/79]
[Article XVIII Amended 11/6/84; Effective 12/6/84]
[Section 1820 Adopted 11/6/90; Effective 12/10/90]
[Section 1806(b) Amended April 24/25, 1999; Effective 6/15/99]
[Section 1800 Amended 11/5/02; Effective 12/20/02]
[Section 1801(d) Amended 11/5/02; Effective 12/20/02]
[Section 1804(b) Amended 11/5/02; Effective 12/20/02]
[Section 1806 Amended 11/5/02; Effective 12/20/02]
[Section 1821 Adopted 11/5/02; Effective 12/20/02]
[Section 1806(a)(2),(3),(6),(8)(vii), and (b) Amended 11/2/10; Effective 12/17/10]
[Section 1803(g) Amended 11/6/12; Effective 12/12/12]
[Section 1804(b) Amended 11/6/12; Effective 12/12/12]
[Section 1805(a), (b), (e) Amended 11/6/12; Effective 12/12/12]
[Section 1803(n) Amended 11/4/14; Effective 11/29/14]
[Section 1803(d) Amended 11/8/22; Effective 12/6/22]
[Section 1804(a)(1) Amended and Section 1804(a)(2) Adopted 11/8/22; Effective 12/6/22]
[Section 1805(a)(3) Amended and Section 1805(a)(4) and (5) Adopted 11/8/22; Effective 12/6/22]
[Section 1806(a)(8)(iv) and (v) Amended 11/8/22; Effective 12/6/22]

18

Effective 12/6/22

